---
title: Implementing hypermedia APIs for web browsers: “REST” clients as antipattern
description: How to quickly assess the REST level of an API
layout: post
author: Hypr
twitter: hyprnz
genre: API
keywords: humble browser hypermedia API
---

There is a current anti-pattern occurring in implementing hypermedia APIs. That “REST” clients must be coded into the browser—for example, as a plugin specific to the media type. It’s an optimisation (and optimisations are needed but not as the baseline). The anti-pattern is not the client per se but rather the server. The client needs to compensate for the server not being RESTful—so you put “more REST” into the client. Based on this insight, the generic browser is therefore a perfect client to start measuring the REST level of the server that the API wants to support. If that is all perfectly clear go see our top ten practical ways to measure how well your API is going. Otherwise, let expand out a little more.

In this [talk](https://www.infoq.com/presentations/data-hypermedia-rest), it gives an example of an API that implements hypermedia as content negotiation through an ATOM-like microformat. It is based on client work that we have been doing now for a number of years. We use the humble browser to explore the network of data (aka domain) exposed through the API—we ensure that we can GET around the network including some basic searching (POST). Our approach is that API should be explorable by development team members including business focussed people. In old school world, developers and business analysts do most of their domain thinking across the relational datastore. In domain driven design (DDD) world, it is done through code-based models. These are still needed for some. But, in contrast, we get everyone to use the browser to explore the network of data through the API in the browser. We find that it is very clear to what extent data is available and where it must be extended (and importantly if you have access rights). Our API is now something that is much larger than just a integration point between machines. It is a fundamental part of our [ubiquitous language](http://martinfowler.com/bliki/UbiquitousLanguage.html). 

Our API should be able to do both machine-to-machine and human-to-machine interactions seamlessly. We have found that the people can and should be able to interact directly with the network of data. We can get this (for almost) free using the humble browser. REST clients, in contrast, are a pattern that mediate a machine-to-machine interaction for a human-to-machine interaction. In the browser, they tend to mediate that the server is one main type of representation. More than that it often needs to do a translation to make it human consumable—readable, understandable and clickable. My argument here is that while not wrong, this is more than what we need. The humble browser is mostly enough if we implement our hypermedia API to work for multiple clients—both humans and machines. Put differently, the humble browser is the base case that successive layering of clients should work on top of rather than instead of. So remember, design your API for content negotiation as set of weighted preferences because among other things you humble browser plays nicely.